population tutorial (#648)
ihmeuw/vivarium_public_health: docs/source/tutorials/population.rst

===================================
Population Structures and Fertility
===================================

:mod:`vivarium_public_health` provides several components for creating and
managing simulated populations. This tutorial demonstrates the minimal
configuration required for each approach.

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

> .. testsetup:: *

Reviewer: cool, I didn't know about this directive

   import numpy as np
   import pandas as pd
   from vivarium import InteractiveContext
   from vivarium_public_health.population import *
   from vivarium_public_health._example_data import *

>    base_plugins = BASE_PLUGINS

Reviewer: what is this doing? Where does BASE_PLUGINS come from?

Author: Added comments.

Reviewer: I mean, like..._where_ does BASE_PLUGINS come from? Is it some sphinx doc auto-imported thing or somethign like that? I don't see it imported from anywhere or defined anywhere.

Overview

> --------

Reviewer: teeny tiny nit, but I like having ==== be the first level header and ----- be the second. It reduces the amount of times you need to resort to weird things like ~~~~ or ^^^^.

Not sure it's worth changing though

There are two categories of population components:

**Initial population** components create the starting set of simulants when the
simulation begins:

- :class:`~vivarium_public_health.population.base_population.BasePopulation` — the standard
  component that samples simulants from demographic data.
- :class:`~vivarium_public_health.population.base_population.ScaledPopulation` — a variant
  that rescales the demographic data before sampling.

**Fertility** components add new simulants during the simulation:

> - :class:`~vivarium_public_health.population.add_new_birth_cohorts.FertilityDeterministic` — adds a

Reviewer: god I hate emdashes and endashes. imo we should add to the global instructions to never ever use them and to just use hyphens. I have that in my copilot instructions.

The reason _is_ practical. If a human goes in and adds new documentation, they will presumably use hyphens and so the docs just look inconsistent.

  fixed number of births per year.
- :class:`~vivarium_public_health.population.add_new_birth_cohorts.FertilityCrudeBirthRate` — adds

>   births based on a population-level crude birth rate, without accounting for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  births based on a population-level crude birth rate without accounting for
```

  the age or sex composition of the population.
- :class:`~vivarium_public_health.population.add_new_birth_cohorts.FertilityAgeSpecificRates` —
  adds births at the individual level based on age-specific fertility rates.

.. note::

>    :class:`~vivarium_public_health.population.base_population.BasePopulation` automatically

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :class:`~vivarium_public_health.population.base_population.BasePopulation`
```

   includes three sub-components:
   :class:`~vivarium_public_health.population.mortality.Mortality`,

>    ``AgeOutSimulants``, and ``Disability``. You do not need to add these

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ``AgeOutSimulants``, and ``Disability``. Do not explicitly add these to the model specification.
```

>    separately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Common Setup
------------

> In a production simulation, data is supplied through a **data artifact** —

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a vivarium simulation, data can be supplied through a **data artifact** —
```

> an HDF file that you build with all the input data your model needs.  To

Reviewer: nit: replace all double-spaces-between-sentences with single spaces

===================================
Population Structures and Fertility
===================================

:mod:`vivarium_public_health` provides several components for creating and
managing simulated populations. This tutorial demonstrates the minimal
configuration required for each approach.

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

.. testsetup:: *

   import numpy as np
   import pandas as pd
   from vivarium import InteractiveContext
   from vivarium_public_health.population import *
   from vivarium_public_health._example_data import *
   base_plugins = BASE_PLUGINS

Overview
--------

There are two categories of population components:

> **Initial population** components create the starting set of simulants when the

Reviewer 2: Base population?

an HDF file that you build with all the input data your model needs.  To
keep the code blocks in this tutorial simple, we use an example artifact for
keys that must come from the artifact, and supply the rest through
configuration overrides (see `Data sources`_).  The `Artifact Data Format`_
section shows the expected key names and column layouts for every data key
so that you know exactly what to put in your own artifact.

Artifact Data Format
--------------------

This section documents the **key name** and **column layout** that each
population component expects.  Some components also support a
``data_sources`` configuration pattern that lets you override individual
keys with a scalar, DataFrame, or callable without rebuilding the artifact
(see `Data sources`_).

Data keys
^^^^^^^^^

The table below lists every data key used by the population components.
Keys marked **artifact-required** must be present in the artifact — the
component loads them directly and they cannot be replaced via configuration.
Keys marked **configurable** can be overridden in the ``data_sources``
section of the configuration (see `Data sources`_); the artifact key shown
is simply the default.

> .. list-table::

Reviewer: This kind of stuff scares me. It's easily generated by ai, but will quickly go out of date. 🤷

     - :class:`~vivarium_public_health.population.base_population.BasePopulation`
     - No (artifact-required)
   * - ``cause.all_causes.cause_specific_mortality_rate``
     - age, sex, year
     - ``value`` (rate)
     - :class:`~vivarium_public_health.population.mortality.Mortality`
     - Yes |mdash| ``mortality.data_sources.all_cause_mortality_rate``
   * - ``population.theoretical_minimum_risk_life_expectancy``
     - age
     - ``value`` (years of remaining life)
     - :class:`~vivarium_public_health.population.mortality.Mortality`
     - Yes |mdash| ``mortality.data_sources.life_expectancy``
   * - ``covariate.live_births_by_sex.estimate``
     - year, sex, ``parameter``
     - ``value``
     - :class:`~vivarium_public_health.population.add_new_birth_cohorts.FertilityCrudeBirthRate`
     - No (artifact-required)
   * - ``covariate.age_specific_fertility_rate.estimate``
     - age, sex, year, ``parameter``
     - ``value``
     - :class:`~vivarium_public_health.population.add_new_birth_cohorts.FertilityAgeSpecificRates`
     - Yes |mdash| ``fertility_age_specific_rates.data_sources.age_specific_fertility_rate``

.. |mdash| unicode:: U+2014

Data sources
^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Some components support a ``data_sources`` configuration pattern that lets

Reviewer: don't _all_ components?

Author: No, some of them need an artifact because they call builder.data.load(key) explicitly.

you override individual data keys without rebuilding the artifact.  This is
especially useful during development or for simple tutorial examples like
the ones in this page.  Components that support it declare their data needs
in ``configuration_defaults``; by default each key points to the
corresponding artifact key.  You can override any of them with:

- **Scalar** (int or float) — broadcast a constant value to all simulants.
- **DataFrame** — use the DataFrame directly.
- **Callable** — call the function at setup time to produce the data.
- **Artifact key** (string) — load a different key from the artifact.

For example, :class:`~vivarium_public_health.population.mortality.Mortality` declares
three configurable data sources:

.. code-block:: yaml

   # Default configuration (loaded from the artifact):
   mortality:
     data_sources:
       all_cause_mortality_rate: "cause.all_causes.cause_specific_mortality_rate"
       life_expectancy: "population.theoretical_minimum_risk_life_expectancy"
       unmodeled_cause_specific_mortality_rate: <internal method>

> Note: The ``unmodeled_cause_specific_mortality_rate`` default is shown as

Reviewer: you can put notes via the `.. note::` directive

the source data.

``BasePopulation`` itself requires ``population.structure``,
``population.age_bins``, and ``population.location`` to be present in the
artifact (these are artifact-required keys).  Its
:class:`~vivarium_public_health.population.mortality.Mortality` sub-component supports
the ``data_sources`` configuration, so mortality rates and life expectancy
can be overridden with scalars or DataFrames — which is what we do in the
tutorial examples below.

Artifact data consumed by BasePopulation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``BasePopulation`` and its sub-components load the following keys from the
artifact.  The examples below use the data builders from the
:mod:`~vivarium_public_health._example_data` module; a production artifact has
the same column layout but with real GBD values.

.. testcode::

   from vivarium_public_health._example_data import (
       population_structure,
       age_bins,
       theoretical_minimum_risk_life_expectancy,
   )

   # population.structure — population counts per demographic cell.
   pop_structure = population_structure()
   print(pop_structure.query("year_start == 1990").head(6).to_string(index=False))

>    #  age_start  age_end    sex  year_start  year_end location      value

Reviewer: instead of adding a commented block of what the output should look like, add a `.. testoutput::` directive to actually test is. (and it shows up in the rendered docs as well)

   #   0.076712 1.000000   Male        1990      1991    Kenya  92.328767
   #   0.076712 1.000000 Female        1990      1991    Kenya  92.328767

   # population.age_bins — defines the age groups used by the demographic data.
   print(age_bins().head(5).to_string(index=False))
   #  age_start   age_end age_group_name
   #   0.000000  0.019178 Early Neonatal
   #   0.019178  0.076712  Late Neonatal
   #   0.076712  1.000000  Post Neonatal
   #   1.000000  5.000000         1 to 4
   #   5.000000 10.000000         5 to 9

   # population.location — a scalar string identifying the simulated location.
   # In the example data this is the string "Kenya".

   # population.theoretical_minimum_risk_life_expectancy — remaining life
   # expectancy by age, used by the Mortality sub-component to compute years
   # of life lost.  Indexed only by age (no sex, year, or location).
   tmrle = theoretical_minimum_risk_life_expectancy()
   print(tmrle.head(5).to_string(index=False))
   #  age_start  age_end  value
   #        0.0      1.0   98.0
   #        1.0      2.0   98.0
   #        2.0      3.0   98.0
   #        3.0      4.0   98.0
   #        4.0      5.0   98.0

> .. testoutput::

Reviewer: this doesn't seem correct.

Author: It's not real data, but the structure of the data is what matters.

Reviewer: I'm referring to the `.. testoutput::`. Looks like you fixed though

   # 1  14.7    Male       180
   # ...

   # Ages span the full default range (0 to 125)
   print(f"Age range: {pop['age'].min():.1f} – {pop['age'].max():.1f}")
   # Age range: 0.0 – 124.9  (approximate; depends on random seed)

.. testoutput::
   :hide:
   :options: +ELLIPSIS, +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE

   ...

Custom age range
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use ``initialization_age_min`` and ``initialization_age_max`` to restrict the
age range of the initial population.  This is the most common customization:

.. testcode::

   config = make_base_config()
   config.update(
       {
           "population": {
               "population_size": 10_000,
               "initialization_age_min": 0,
               "initialization_age_max": 5,
           },
           "mortality": {"data_sources": {"all_cause_mortality_rate": 0}},
       },
       layer="override",
   )

   sim = InteractiveContext(
       components=[BasePopulation()],
       configuration=config,
       plugin_configuration=base_plugins,
   )

   pop = sim.get_population(["age"])
   print(f"Age range: {pop['age'].min():.2f} – {pop['age'].max():.2f}")
   # Age range: 0.00 – 4.99  (approximate; all simulants are between 0 and 5)

> .. testoutput::

Reviewer: none of these should be here I don't think. what is it actually testing?

To clarify, I think what you want is:

```
.. testcode::

    # set everything up
    print(XXX)

.. testoutput::

   <stdout from XXX>

.. testcode::

    # set the next bit up
    print(YYY)

.. testoutput::

    <stdout from YYY>

.
.
.
```

       configuration=config,
       plugin_configuration=base_plugins,
   )

   pop = sim.get_population(["age"])
   # All simulants are newborns; ages are smoothed within the first time step.
   print(f"Max age: {pop['age'].max():.4f}")
   # Max age: 0.0836  (approximate; a small fraction of a year)

.. testoutput::
   :hide:
   :options: +ELLIPSIS, +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE

   ...

Filtering by sex
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``include_sex`` option restricts the population to a single sex.  Valid
values are ``"Male"``, ``"Female"``, or ``"Both"`` (the default):

.. testcode::

   config = make_base_config()
   config.update(
       {
           "population": {
               "population_size": 10_000,
               "include_sex": "Female",
           },
           "mortality": {"data_sources": {"all_cause_mortality_rate": 0}},
       },
       layer="override",
   )

   sim = InteractiveContext(
       components=[BasePopulation()],
       configuration=config,
       plugin_configuration=base_plugins,
   )

   pop = sim.get_population(["sex"])
   print(pop["sex"].value_counts())
   # Female    10000

.. testoutput::
   :hide:
   :options: +ELLIPSIS, +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE

   ...

> Untracking age (aging out)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aging out of a simulation
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Setting ``untracking_age`` causes simulants to be removed from the tracked

Reviewer: You should link to the higher-level vivarium docs that talk about how untracking works (if there are any...I think there are?)

the ``AgeOutSimulants`` sub-component when ``untracking_age`` is set:

.. testcode::

   config = make_base_config()
   config.update(
       {
           "population": {
               "population_size": 10_000,
               "initialization_age_min": 4,
               "initialization_age_max": 4,
               "untracking_age": 5,
           },
           "time": {"step_size": 100},
           "mortality": {"data_sources": {"all_cause_mortality_rate": 0}},
       },
       layer="override",
   )

   sim = InteractiveContext(
       components=[BasePopulation()],
       configuration=config,
       plugin_configuration=base_plugins,
   )

   # All 4-year-olds at the start
   print(f"Tracked: {len(sim.get_population(['age']))}")
   # Tracked: 10000

   # After running for 600 days (~1.6 years), everyone has aged past 5
   import pandas as pd
   sim.run_for(duration=pd.Timedelta(days=600))
   pop = sim.get_population(["is_aged_out", "exit_time"], include_untracked=True)
   print(f"Aged out: {pop['is_aged_out'].sum()}")
   # Aged out: 10000

.. testoutput::
   :hide:
   :options: +ELLIPSIS, +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE

   ...

> Configuration summary for BasePopulation

Reviewer: A lot of the docs here seem like they should be more part of the concept docs rather than tutorials. I'm not 100% sure though? But like...isn't all of this in the concept docs as well? We def don't want repeated documentation and can discuss where the line is between concept and tutorial as a team.

Author: The concept docs don't mention most key names or the expected data structure and when they do it's not in easily referenced/structured way. There are occasionally 1 to 2 sentence overlaps when describing components.

is one row per age |times| year |times| sex |times| parameter combination:

.. testcode::

   from vivarium_public_health._example_data import age_specific_fertility_rate

   # covariate.age_specific_fertility_rate.estimate — each row gives a
   # fertility rate for an age × year × sex × parameter cell.
   asfr_data = age_specific_fertility_rate(rate=0.05)
   print(asfr_data.head(6).to_string(index=False))
   #  year_start  year_end  age_start   age_end     sex   parameter  value
   #        1990      1991   0.000000  0.019178  Female  mean_value   0.05
   #        1990      1991   0.000000  0.019178  Female lower_value   0.05
   #        1990      1991   0.000000  0.019178  Female upper_value   0.05
   #        1990      1991   0.000000  0.019178    Male  mean_value   0.05
   #        1990      1991   0.000000  0.019178    Male lower_value   0.05
   #        1990      1991   0.000000  0.019178    Male upper_value   0.05

.. testoutput::
   :hide:
   :options: +ELLIPSIS, +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE

   ...

Because this component supports the ``data_sources`` configuration, the
tutorial example below supplies a constant rate directly instead of loading
from the artifact:

.. testcode::

>    from vivarium import InteractiveContext

Reviewer: note: you don't really need to keep importing things over and over - everything persists from one test to the next. It kind of depends on what you want the user to see. If the intent is one long continuous "session", then don't keep importing. If you want each section to show from scratch, then do.

Author: I'm imagining a user might only be looking at one component at a time.

          4.0      5.0   98.0

Default configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The absolute minimum is a ``population_size``. Everything else has sensible
defaults (ages 0–125, both sexes, no age-out):

.. testcode::

   from vivarium import InteractiveContext
   from vivarium_public_health.population import BasePopulation

   config = make_base_config()
   config.update(
       {
           "population": {
               "population_size": 10_000,
           },
           # Override mortality to zero so simulants don't die during
           # this demonstration.
           "mortality": {"data_sources": {"all_cause_mortality_rate": 0}},
       },
       layer="override",
   )

   sim = InteractiveContext(
       components=[BasePopulation()],
       configuration=config,
       plugin_configuration=base_plugins,
   )

   pop = sim.get_population(["age", "sex", "location"])
   assert len(pop) == 10_000
   assert pop["age"].min() >= 0
   assert pop["age"].max() <= 125
   assert set(pop["sex"].unique()) == {"Male", "Female"}
   print(f"Population: {len(pop)}, ages {pop['age'].min():.1f}–{pop['age'].max():.1f}")

.. testoutput::
   :options: +ELLIPSIS, +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE

>    Population: 10000, ages ...

Reviewer: testing hidden output (...) isn't useful. Change the print statement so it actually prints both, e.g. something like

```
print(len(pop))
print(pop['age'].min())
print(pop['age'].max())
```

Author: The ages are non-deterministic so we just print length. We test that they're in the expected range earlier.

by the ``AgeOutSimulants`` sub-component when ``untracking_age`` is set:

.. testcode::

   config = make_base_config()
   config.update(
       {
           "population": {
               "population_size": 10_000,
               "initialization_age_min": 4,
               "initialization_age_max": 4,
               "untracking_age": 5,
           },
           "time": {"step_size": 100},
           "mortality": {"data_sources": {"all_cause_mortality_rate": 0}},
       },
       layer="override",
   )

   sim = InteractiveContext(
       components=[BasePopulation()],
       configuration=config,
       plugin_configuration=base_plugins,
   )

   # All 4-year-olds at the start
   print(f"Tracked: {len(sim.get_population(['age']))}")

.. testoutput::

   Tracked: 10000

.. testcode::

   # After running for 600 days (~1.6 years), everyone has aged past 5
   import pandas as pd
   sim.run_for(duration=pd.Timedelta(days=600))
   pop = sim.get_population(["is_aged_out", "exit_time"], include_untracked=True)
   print(f"Aged out: {pop['is_aged_out'].sum()}")

.. testoutput::
   :options: +ELLIPSIS, +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE

>    ...

Reviewer: Maybe I'm not understanding these ellipses. Why are they here? Why isn't the output just `Aged out: 10000`?

Author: There's some extra output produced by sim.run_for() that we don't want to look at.

and does not require any artifact data.

.. testcode::

   from vivarium import InteractiveContext
   from vivarium_public_health.population import BasePopulation, FertilityDeterministic

   config = make_base_config()
   config.update(
       {
           "population": {
               "population_size": 1_000,
               "initialization_age_min": 0,
               "initialization_age_max": 100,
           },
           "time": {"step_size": 10},
           "mortality": {"data_sources": {"all_cause_mortality_rate": 0}},
           "fertility": {"number_of_new_simulants_each_year": 500},
       },
       layer="override",
   )

   sim = InteractiveContext(
       components=[BasePopulation(), FertilityDeterministic()],
       configuration=config,
       plugin_configuration=base_plugins,
   )

   import pandas as pd
   sim.run_for(duration=pd.Timedelta(days=100))
   pop = sim.get_population(["age"])
   # Population grew from 1000 by ~500 * (100/365) ≈ 137 new simulants.
   assert len(pop) > 1_000
   print(f"Population grew: {len(pop) > 1_000}")

.. testoutput::
   :options: +ELLIPSIS, +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE

>    ...

Reviewer: ellipsis

          1992      1993   Male mean_value  500.0

This component's artifact key is artifact-required (it does not support
``data_sources`` overrides). The example artifact provides this data
automatically:

.. testcode::

   from vivarium import InteractiveContext
   from vivarium_public_health.population import BasePopulation, FertilityCrudeBirthRate

   config = make_base_config()
   config.update(
       {
           "population": {
               "population_size": 10_000,
               "initialization_age_min": 0,
               "initialization_age_max": 125,
           },
           "time": {"step_size": 10},
           "mortality": {"data_sources": {"all_cause_mortality_rate": 0}},
       },
       layer="override",
   )

   sim = InteractiveContext(
       components=[BasePopulation(), FertilityCrudeBirthRate()],
       configuration=config,
       plugin_configuration=base_plugins,
   )

   import pandas as pd
   sim.run_for(duration=pd.Timedelta(days=100))
   pop = sim.get_population(["age"])
   assert len(pop) > 10_000
   print(f"Population grew: {len(pop) > 10_000}")

.. testoutput::
   :options: +ELLIPSIS, +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE

>    ...

Reviewer: ellipsis

   config = make_base_config()
   config.update(
       {
           "population": {
               "population_size": 1_000,
               "initialization_age_min": 0,
               "initialization_age_max": 125,
           },
           "time": {"step_size": 10},
           "mortality": {"data_sources": {"all_cause_mortality_rate": 0}},
           # Override the fertility rate via data_sources configuration.
           "fertility_age_specific_rates": {
               "data_sources": {
                   "age_specific_fertility_rate": 0.05,
               },
           },
       },
       layer="override",
   )

   sim = InteractiveContext(
       components=[BasePopulation(), FertilityAgeSpecificRates()],
       configuration=config,
       plugin_configuration=base_plugins,
   )

   import pandas as pd
   sim.run_for(duration=pd.Timedelta(days=1000))
   pop = sim.get_population(["age", "parent_id", "last_birth_time"])

   # Newborns have a parent_id pointing to their mother
   newborns = pop[pop["parent_id"] >= 0]
   assert len(newborns) > 0
   print(f"Births occurred: {len(newborns) > 0}")

.. testoutput::
   :options: +ELLIPSIS, +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE

>    ...

Reviewer: ellipsis

       theoretical_minimum_risk_life_expectancy,
   )

   # population.structure - population counts per demographic cell.
   pop_structure = population_structure()
   print(pop_structure.query("year_start == 1990").head(6).to_string(index=False))

.. testoutput::

>    :options: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE

Reviewer: omg if this does what I think/hope it does then that's amazing
